Background Brief - Legislative Committee Services Page 1 of 5
September 2012
Inside this Brief
 Rights and
Responsibilities of the
Landlord
 Rights and
Responsibilities of the
Tenant
 Rights and
Responsibilities -
Condominium
Conversion
 Rights of Tenants of
Foreclosed Properties
 Resources
 Staff and Agency
Contacts
Legislative Committee Services
State Capitol Building
Salem, Oregon 97301
(503) 986-1813
Background Brief on …
Landlord-
Tenant Rights
U.S. landlord-tenant law governs renting commercial
and residential property. It is primarily composed of
state statutory and English common law. State statutes
and the courts normally govern landlord-tenant
relationships. However, federal law (the Civil Rights Act
of 1968 and the Federal Fair Housing Act) may be
applicable during national/regional emergencies and in
preventing discrimination.
The landlord-tenant relationship is founded on duties
prescribed by statutory law, common law, or the
individual lease. Provisions contained in a lease are
normally regulated by statutory law. The primary basis
to all leases is the implied covenant of quiet enjoyment.
This covenant ensures that possessions will not be
disturbed by someone with a superior legal title to the
land, including the landlord. Unless the lease states
otherwise, there is an assumption that the tenant has a
duty to pay rent.
Oregon’s Residential Landlord and Tenant Act (ORS
Chapter 90) governs landlord and tenant laws and
applies to renting a home, apartment, or room to sleep
in, or for renting space for a mobile home or floating
home. Exceptions include transient occupancy in a hotel
or motel, living in a place you are buying, living on land
rented primarily for the purpose of farming, residence in
certain institutions, and occupancy by a landlord’s
employee.
Rights and Responsibilities of the Landlord
The Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act
requires that a rental unit be in a habitable condition at
all times during the tenancy. This includes plumbing
facilities, water supply, adequate heating facilities,
electrical lights, clean building and grounds, and all
other areas and facilities properly repaired and working.
Waterproofing and weather protection is
Background Brief - Legislative Committee Services Page 2 of 5
required in the roof, walls, windows, and doors.
The rental unit must include a working smoke
detector and, if the unit contains a source of
carbon monoxide, a working carbon monoxide
detector. The unit must have working locks for
all dwelling entrance doors.
Disclosures
The rental agreement must include notification if
the dwelling is located in a 100-year flood plain.
The agreement must also disclose the smoking
policy for the premises.
Security Deposits
The landlord has 31 days after termination of the
rental agreement to refund all deposits and
prepaid rent due to the renter. If the landlord
needs to keep any portion of the deposit to cover
damages, breakage, unpaid rent, etc., a statement
showing the use of that money must be
forwarded to the tenant within 31 days. Deposit
money may not be claimed by the landlord to
cover ordinary wear and tear by the tenant.
A landlord is not required to repair damages in
order to make a claim against a deposit. Labor
cost for cleaning and repairs must be based on a
reasonable hourly rate. The landlord can perform
the work and charge a reasonable hourly rate.
Carpet cleaning can be subtracted from the
security deposit under specified circumstances,
including the cleaning was done with a
professional carpet cleaning machine, the carpet
was cleaned immediately prior to the tenant
taking possession, and the rental agreement
includes a provision outlining the right to deduct
the cost of carpet cleaning regardless of whether
the tenant cleans the carpet prior to vacating the
dwelling.
Screening Charge
A landlord can charge an applicant a screening
charge to cover the cost of obtaining applicant
information as the landlord processes the rental
agreement application. The charge may not be
greater than the landlord's average actual costs
or the customary amount charged by tenant
screening services or consumer credit reporting
agencies for a comparable level of screening.
The landlord must provide receipts for the
applicant screening fee. The landlord cannot
require payment unless a written notice is
provided to the applicant that describes the
screening process and criteria, amount of the
charge, the rights of applicant to dispute the
accuracy of the information provided to the
landlord, and the rent charged and deposits
required. The written notice must also include an
estimate of the number of rental units of the type
sought by the applicant that are available or will
be available in a reasonable future time, as well
as the approximate number of applications under
consideration for those units. The screening
charge must be refunded if a vacancy is filled
before the screening is conducted or if the
screening is not conducted for any reason.
Additional Fees
A landlord has the right to charge a late fee as
stipulated in the written rental agreement. The
agreement must describe how the late charge is
calculated, the date on which the rent payment is
due, and the date on which a late fee becomes
due. The landlord must wait at least four days
after rent is due to charge a late fee. While
nonpayment of a late charge alone is not
grounds for eviction for nonpayment of rent,
nonpayment of a late charge may be grounds for
a 30-day for-cause eviction. Interest charges on
unpaid late fees can also be imposed.
If a utility or service provider bills the landlord
for a utility or service provided directly to the
tenant, the landlord can require the tenant to pay
a utility or service charge to the landlord. A
small, additional charge can be added for cable
television, direct satellite or other video
subscription services or for Internet access or
usage. The fee cannot be more than as stated in
the written rental agreement. The additional
charge must not be more than 10 percent of the
utility or service charge billed to the tenant. The
utility or service charge plus the additional
amount must be less than the typical cost the
tenant would incur if the tenant contracted
directly with the provider.
A lease break fee can be charged but cannot be
more than one and a half times of the monthly
stated rent. If the fee is assessed, the landlord
Background Brief - Legislative Committee Services Page 3 of 5
cannot also recover any unpaid rent or recover
damages related to the cost of renting the unit to
a new tenant.
Additional fees can be charged for a late rent
payment, dishonored check, violation of a
written pet agreement, or for tampering or
removing a smoke detector or carbon monoxide
detector. A fee up to $50 can be charged for late
payment of a utility or service charge owed to
the landlord; failure to clean up pet waste,
garbage or other waste from premises other than
the dwelling unit; parking violations; and
improper use of vehicles within the premises.
Rent Increases
A lease usually establishes the rent for the lease
specified period. However, the landlord can
raise the rent to any level if the agreement
provides for such an increase. The landlord can
raise the rent after providing 30 days written
notice for month-to-month tenancy, and seven
days for week-to-week tenancy. For month-to-
month rented space for a manufactured dwelling
or floating home, the landlord must provide 90
days written notice.
Entering a Unit
The landlord or landlord’s agent must notify the
tenant at least 24 hours in advance before
entering the property. There are certain
exceptions, such as when a tenant has requested
repairs, when there is an emergency, when
tenant is absent for more than seven days, or if
there is a written agreement to the contrary.
Ending the Tenancy
To end a month-to-month tenancy, the tenant
must be given a 30-day written notice or, if the
tenant has lived in the unit for more than a year,
a 60-day written notice. A tenant can terminate a
month-to-month tenancy with a 30-day written
notice. A week-to-week rental period requires a
ten-day notice.
A fixed-term tenancy automatically ends on the
last day specified in the signed rental agreement
and cannot be altered unless the landlord or
tenant has cause to end it. Cause includes
violation of the rental agreement, failure of
landlord to maintain habitable conditions, failure
of tenant to pay rent.
Notice for Eviction
If a tenant is five days late in paying rent, the
landlord is allowed to issue a 144-hour notice to
pay or vacate. If a tenant is eight days late in
paying rent, the landlord is allowed to issue a
72-hour notice to pay or vacate. If the rent is
paid within the notice period, the tenant does not
need to vacate.
A landlord can give a tenant a 24-hour notice to
vacate if the tenant has committed specified acts
or acts considered "outrageous in the extreme."
This may include threatening other tenants,
intentionally damaging property, injuring
someone, prostitution, or possession of a
controlled substance. An act can be proven to be
extremely outrageous even if it does not violate
a criminal statute. However, no matter what the
tenant has done to the rental unit or to the
landlord, the tenant cannot be locked out of the
unit nor have essential services stopped by the
landlord.
A landlord can also evict perpetrators of
physical violence related to domestic violence,
sexual assault, or stalking against a household
member who is a tenant, but cannot terminate
the agreement of the other tenants in such cases.
A landlord cannot terminate a rental agreement,
evict a tenant, or treat a tenant differently
because they are a victim of domestic violence,
sexual assault or stalking.
Temporary Occupancy
A landlord may allow an individual to become a
temporary occupant of the tenant’s dwelling
through a written agreement between the tenant,
temporary occupant, and the landlord. The
tenant can terminate the agreement without
cause at any time, while the landlord can do so
only for cause that is a violation of the
temporary occupancy agreement. The landlord
has the right to screen the temporary occupant
for conduct or criminal records, but not for
credit or income qualifications.
Background Brief - Legislative Committee Services Page 4 of 5
Repairs
The landlord must make repairs without cost to
the tenant on items directly related to the unit’s
habitable condition, unless the tenant is the
cause of the problem.
If repairs are needed because the dwelling is
negligently or deliberately damaged, the
landlord has the right to end the rental
agreement after proper notice or delivery of a
30-day notice that allows the continuation of the
rental agreement if damages are repaired within
14 days.
Rights and Responsibilities of the
Tenant
Although the landlord maintains legal title to the
property, the tenant has use of the property and
it is considered the tenant’s home with regard to
the right of privacy. As noted earlier, the
landlord has the right to inspect the property.
The rental property must be safe and sanitary
and be maintained throughout the rental period.
If repairs are necessary for safety or sanitation,
the landlord must make such repairs without cost
to the tenant. The condition for repair cannot be
from tenant neglect or a deliberate act.
Duties of the tenant include using the property
only as a dwelling; paying the rent, keeping the
property reasonably clean and maintained, and,
at the end of the rental term, to return the
property to the landlord in the same condition in
which the tenant received it, except for ordinary
wear and tear. It is the tenant's responsibility to
test the smoke detector and carbon monoxide
detector every six months and to replace
batteries as needed.
Repairs
Tenants have the right to cause the repair of
some minor habitability defects of up to $300
and deduct the cost from the rent if the landlord
doesn’t make the repair within seven days of
receiving a written notice. The landlord can
designate who can make the repair if it is
reasonable and does not diminish the tenant’s
rights. Tenants may not have mold, radon,
asbestos, or lead-based paint defects repaired.
The tenant can give a written 30-day notice for
terminating the tenancy if the landlord is not in
compliance with the rental agreement or is not
maintaining the unit in a habitable condition. In
a week-to-week tenancy, the rental agreement
can terminate in as little as seven days if the
breach is not remedied. In a month-to-month
tenancy, the landlord has seven days to remedy a
breach involving essential services and 30 days
for all other cases. The timeframe can be
shortened to 48-hours if the lack of essential
service poses an imminent and serious threat to
the tenant’s health, safety or property.
Right of Entry
The tenant renting a house or an apartment from
someone enters into a legal contract/relationship
with that person and possesses certain rights and
duties. The tenant has the right of peaceful
possession and the right to a “habitable” home.
While the landlord must provide at least 24
hours notice before entering the property,
exceptions are made for emergencies, addressing
repair requests without designated times or
dates, or conditions stipulated in the rental
agreement.
Rights and Responsibilities -
Condominium Conversion
If a rental unit is being converted to a
condominium, tenants are required to receive
notice 120 days before the conversion is
completed. The notice is to provide specified
information regarding the tenant’s rights as well
as the anticipated acquisition cost and monthly
expenses. Tenants must be given the first
opportunity to purchase the unit they reside in,
and at least 60 days to either accept or reject the
offer.
During the 120-day period, construction work on
the unit cannot occur without the tenant’s
permission. Construction on the general
common elements can only take place between
8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and tenants are required
to be allowed safe and ready access to their unit.
The landlord cannot issue a no-cause
termination notice within the timeframe, and
Background Brief - Legislative Committee Services Page 5 of 5
cannot show the unit to prospective buyers
without the tenant’s permission.
Rights of Tenants of Foreclosed
Properties
Tenants are to be notified if the property they are
living in is in foreclosure. The trustee must send
a notice to any individual who occupies the
property and who is or might be a residential
tenant. The notice must specify the tenant’s
rights and provide information regarding legal
resources available at no cost to the tenant. If the
purchaser wants to move in and use the property
as a primary residence, the purchaser can give
written notice and require the tenant to move
after 90 days, even in cases in which there is a
fixed lease with more than 90 days remaining. In
other cases, the purchaser can have a tenant
evicted after the fixed term lease ends or 90 days
after the notice for other tenancies. Once the
tenant receives this notice, they can apply
security deposits or pre-paid rent toward their
current rent obligations.
The purchaser becomes the new landlord if they
accept rent from the tenant, enter into a new
rental agreement, or fail to give written notice
within 30 days of the foreclosure sale that the
tenant must vacate.
Many of the notice periods will shorten on
January 1, 2015.
Resources
A compilation of Oregon statutes related to
landlord and tenant rights is available from the
Office of Legislative Counsel. The publication
includes select laws relating to the Residential
Landlord and Tenant Act, hotels and motels,
temporary and transitional housing, and farm
labor housing.
Staff and Agency Contacts
Jan Nordlund
Legislative Committee Services
503-986-1557
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development
971-222-2600 (Portland Field Office)
Oregon State Bar
800-452-8260
Community Alliance of Tenants
Renters’ Rights Hotline
503-288-0130
Manufactured Communities Resource Center
800-453-5511
Committee Services provides centralized, non-
partisan research and issue analysis for the
Legislative Branch. Committee Services does not
provide legal advice. Background Briefs are intended
to give the reader a general understanding of a
subject, and are based on information which is
current as of the date of publication. Legislative,
executive, and judicial actions subsequent to
publication may affect the timeliness of the
information.

Source: https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/lpro/Publications/LandlordTenantRights.pdf 